bronze age
3000-1200 bc

iron (dark) age
1200-800 bc

archaic period
800-480 bc

classical period
480-323 bc

estimated beginning of Mycenaean civilization
1700 bc

estimated time of palaces and citadels being built
1500 bc

estimated time of places and citadels being destroyed
1200 bc

estimated time of decline and disappearance of (evidential) Mycenaean culture
1100 bc

estimated time of recovery of Mycenaean culture
1000 bc

estimated time of acceleration in Mycenaen culture
800 bc (archaic period begins)

estimated time of reintroduction of literacy
800 bc (archaic period begins)

Homer
wrote illiad and odyssey. dated around 700 bc

Hesiod
wrote theogony and the works and days. dated around 700 bc

traditional order of composition of homer and hesiods' work
illiad, odyssey, theogony, works and days

works and days
talks about farmer's yearly tasks and the days of the month that are good or bad for various activities. important themes are justice, leaders, and women.

linear B tables
from the bronze age. described 'basileus' (kings)

modular formulas
helps oral composition. repetitive adjectives (cloud-gathering zeus).

theogony
written by hesiod. provides a creation story (celebration of the victory of zeus). 

the polis
city state. greek communities of the archaic period which usually seemed to be ruled by aristocratic elites.

lyric poets
important source of information about the society and culture of archaic polis.

fragments
surviving quotes from lyric poets

symposium
drinking party. important theme of lyric poets

tyrants
a single aristocrat seizing power for himself. few tyrannies lasted two generations. (sparta never experiences a tyranny).

hoplites
heavily equipped spearmen

phalanxes
close-order formation of heavily equipped spearmen

the battle of Salamis
persian wars. described by aeschylus and herodotus.

Aeschylus
wrote persians. 

Herodotus
wrote histories.

parrhesia
freedom of speech (limited to religion)

the eupatridai
seventh century athenian aristocrats

archons
chief officials of seventh century athenians. hold office for a year then added to the Areopagus.

Council of the Areopagus
most important political institution of seven century athens - made up of former archons

Cylon
an eupatridai who tried to make himself a tyrant in the 630s/620s but fails

Draco
appointed to write down the laws after Cylon's attempt at tyranny. his laws seem to suck/have no effect (made law on homicide/revenge - community decided instead of individually decided).

Solon
appointed in 594/3 to resolve economic and political crisis with a comprehensive package of reforms. succeeds in alleviating the immediate risis but factional conflict within Attica continued. outlaws slavery and widens access to political institution. establishes social clsses (material wealth implies political power). 

Pisistratus
launches a coup in 561 that fails. launches another in 546 which succeeds. remains tyrant until death in 527. wasn't a typical tyrant. brings political stability and social justice (law enforcers). 

Hippias
Pisistratus's son that replaces him after his death. driven into exile in 510 following spartan intervention.

Isagoras
a chief contender of power after Hippias's exile. saw some success in 508/7, but driven out of Athens by rival Cleisthenes.

Cleisthenes
a chief contender of power after Hippias's exile. ultimately wins and strives for a more stable political system. opens political institution to everyone. divides region into new groups/tribes (artifical division of previous factions). 

eleutheria
freedom

to ison
equality

Thebes
greek city that did not resist the Persians

medizing
never letting cities forget their cowardice against the Persians - to be loyal to the persians

trieme
greek warship

Delian League
Athenian empire - military alliance which continues to fight against Persia from 478-450

Athen/Sparta Rivalry
after 460

reform of Ephialtes
462/1 - taakes away most of the remaining powers of the Areopagus council

Peloponnesian war
431-404. between Sparta and Athens. 

metics
free non-citizen residents of Attica. could not participate in politics, own real estate, specially taxed and liable to military conscription
