relational / dialectical analytical approach
studying things with continuous change (x cannot be understood without y) micro/macro, local/global, political/economical, structure/agency, gender-class-ethnicity/race

sociological imagination
to understand the relationship between individuals and society. ability to see connection between personal (individual) struggles and social structures.

'seeing the strange in the familiar'
asking why things are the way they are as opposed to accepting norms and using them as explainations

the significance of Durkheim's study of suicide
structural function of suicide and the relations between individuals and society that create it

positivism
view that the appropriate methodology of sociology should emphasize empirical observation

empiricism
theory that states knowledge comes only or primarily from sensory experiences

social conflict approach/critical sociology
focuses on the forces that create and perpetuate inequalities. includes feminist theory, marxist theory, critical race theory, and globalization theory

interpretivist approach
interpretations attatched to everything. includes symbolic interactionism,

symbolic interactionism
Max Weber. focuses on micro level social interaction and the subjective meaning of social behaviour. Traditional beliefs and values -> pre cap. rational beliefs and values/efficiency -> cap. 

the Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism
beliefs from a certain sections of Protestantism focused purely on a pursuit of wealth. allowed the emergence of cap (encouraged a strong work ethic)


rationalization of society


structural functionalism


manifest and latent functions of social institutions


social solidarity / social ties


exploitation


surplus value


surplus labour


social class


relations of production


means of production


means of subsistence


wage labour


ideology


mode of production


capital as a social relation


primitive accumulation
seperating producers from their means of subsistence

vagabonds


the role of the state in a capitalist mode of production


three elements necessary for the survival of capitalism
resources, labour, market

three mechanisms used by capitalism to deal with obstacles/dissent
violent, legal, and idealogical

economic determinism
misinterpretation of Marx's theory that the economy 

what does it mean to think sociologically?
to see the strange in the familiar

what are the major theoretical fields in sociology?


what are the two main approaches to producing knowledge in sociology?
positivism and interpretivism

anomic suicide
suicide when norms governing their behaviour are weakly defined

egoistic suicide
suicide within groups of low social solidarity 

alturistic suicide
suicide within groups of high social solidarity (soldier dying for their unit)

social action


social interaction


social relationship


social structure
stable paterns of social interactions
